Non-Ql Disk Formats
===================

1 Introduction

This file describes a set of associated programs all concerned with
reading data of disks in various formats, and (in some cases)
performing some basic conversions. All are based on 3.5" double sided
disks, but some will probably work on 5.25" and single sided variants.

All of the programs include basic instructions at the beginning, which
is more useful than referring to a separate document whilst using them.
They all need TK2, and (I hope) have been stripped of Minerva
dependencies. Note, also, that (as originallu supplied) all files are
in subdirectory "DFS_".

I make no guarantee of any sort about these programs, and cannot be
held responsible for any damage or loss to programs or data that may
arise from their use or misuse.

On the other hand, if you let me know about any bugs you find then I
will have a go at correcting them. If you have documentation on some
other disk format and can supply and example disk or two, then I may
have a go at writing code to read those. (Note that some formats
require non-standard disk hardware, which the Ql doesn't have.)

I have no idea whether these will work with the Miracle Gold Card. If
you want to find out, then you can buy me one [or try running them...]

        Richard Kettlewell
        rjk@greenend.org.uk

1.1 Future Developments

An obvious future development would be to add routines for two way file
transfer. Other possibilities would including rewriting in C, which
would improve speed a bit, and adding wildcard facilities.

2 The Acorn Archimedes

2.1 ARTHUR_BAS

This program reads the (now obsolete) D format disks, as produced by the
Arthur operating system (also now obsolete.)

2.1.1 Directory

To get a directory, type a command like

        adir '[<drive>:][<dirname>{.<dirname>}]'

e.g.

        adir '1:'
        adir '1:subdir'
        adir '1:subdir.subdir'
        adir ''
        adir 'subdir'
        adir 'subdir.subdir'
        adir '2:'

        etc.

2.1.2 File Copying

To copy a file from an Arthur disk to any QDOS device, type something like

        acopy '[<drive>:]{<dirname>.}<filename>','<qdos filename>'

e.g.

        acopy '1:file','scr_'
        acopy 'file','scr_480x200a16x0'
        acopy 'subdir.file' to 'ram1_file'
        acopy '2:file','ser1'

        etc.

This program is based on no documentation of any shape or form and
cannot therefore be expected to be perfect. Since the D format is now
of little real use, do not expect any further development of this
program.

2.2 RISCOS_BAS

This a rather more useful program which reads the more recent E format
disks - the current standard in the Archimedes world. It is quite
different to the above in several ways.

2.2.1 Selecting Disks

You must select which drive to use by the mount procedure:-

        mount <drivenumber>

e.g.

        mount 1                         Select drive 1
        mount 2                         Select drive 2

        etc.

If you change the disk in the drive, then you must call this procedure
again since the procedure sets up an array of the map. It's quite slow,
which is why it is not done automatically.

2.2.2 Directory

To get a directory, you need:-

        xcat '${.<subdir>}'

e.g.

        xcat '$'
        xcat '$.subdir'

Note that $ represents the root directory, and is mandatory.

The directory is listed in this format:-

Column          Use

0               Filename
16              Filetype
                        The name for those that I know, the hex code for those
                        that I don't.
 16             Load address (if the file has one - else file type)
 25             Execution address (if the file has one)
34              R (can read) flag
35              W (can write) flag
36              L (file locked) flag
37              D (directory) flag

The list of filetypes was supplied by an Arc owning friend. It's not
complete, but it is fairly easy to add to.

2.2.3 File Copying

To copy a file to a QDOS device, you need:-

        xcopy '${.<subdir>}.<filename>','[<qdos filename>]'

If you pass a null string as the QDOS filename, then the file will be
written to channel #1.

e.g.

        xcopy '$.file','ram1_file'
        xcopy '$.subdir.file',''

There is no real reason why you should not copy a directory to a QDOS
file e.g.

        xcopy '$','ram1_temp'

but there is no reason why you should either.

Note that I have been unable to test this program with a fragmented
disk. Since RISCOS avoids fragmentation if it can, any problem that
might exist should be rare - but if you do come across some difficulty,
I would appreciate a look at a disk that causes problems. (Make sure
that the one that you actually post causes problems, not just that one
that you copied it off.)

2.3 BASICV_BBC

This is the BBC basic source file (copied to the Ql) of the program
which eventually evolved into dfs_arc_basicV_bas. (Basic V is the
version of BBC Basic which the Archimedes runs.)

2.4 BASICV_BAS

This program takes a basic source file copied from an Archimedes disk
and converts it into an ASCII file. Follow the on screen prompts. The
program mentioned above would be a good starting point, since it tells
you what to set the variable listo% to for various effects.

3 SAMDOS

3.1 SAM_BAS

You can run this program for file copying; there are also some
procedures.

3.1.1 RUN

When RUN, this program copies files from SAM Coupe disks (a computer
based on the Spectrum - a bit - and now sold by SAM Computers Ltd.) to
QDOS devices. RUN the program and follow the on screen instructions;
the SAM disk should be in drive 1.

3.1.2 STQ

This converts a SAM screen font to a Ql screen font. Both files should
be on Ql disks.

3.1.3 VS

This converts a SAM screen to a Ql screen. It's very slow. Follow the
prompts. Again, all files on Ql disks.

3.1.4 VF

This is a trivial procedure which views a Ql font (I wrote it after
porting a bunch of SAM fonts.) It needs Minerva to work. You will
probably never, ever need it. (For those without Minerva, conversion
should be quite trivial.)

3.2 MasterDOS

The program appears to cope with MasterDOS disks, but all the files in
subdirectories are displayed as being in the root directory. I can live
with this for now.

4 MS-DOS

This program originally started out as Atari ST only, but has since
been updated to allow MS-DOS disks as well. Of all the programs, it has
been around the longest.

4.1 MSDOS_BAS

This is for reading MS-DOS (i.e. IBM, Amstrad, Compaq etc.) and TOS
(i.e. Atari ST) disks.

4.1.1 Directories

        cat '[<drive>:][{<subdir>\}<subdir>]'

e.g.

        cat 'a:'
        cat ''
        cat 'b:'
        cat 'b:subdir'
        cat 'subdir\subdir'

Drive a: corresponds to flp1_ and b: to flp2_.

4.1.2 File Copying

        xcopy '[<drive>:]{<subdir>\}<filename>','[<qdos filename>]'

If no QDOS filename is supplied then the file is sent to channel #1.

e.g.

        xcopy 'a:file','ram1_file'
        xcopy 'b:dir\file',''

4.1.3 Disk Information

The command

        statistics

will prompt you to insert a disk in drive 1, and then list some of the
information found in the boot sector. This may or may not be of
interest.

5 QDOS

5.1 QDOS_BAS

This program reads Ql disks and copied files to a QDOS device. Wow.

In fact, it does this by direct sector access and is intended to be
ported to other machines as necessary. Note that it only works on the
original no-subdirectories format, since that's all I have at the time
of writing.

Feel free to port this to other machines, as long as you mention who
worked out the original code. Since anyone capable of porting this will
understand the instructions in the REMarks at the start, I see no need
to document it here (it's of no use to anyone else.)

5.2 QXPLORE_BAS

This program contains a few useful procedures for exploring the
structures at the start of the Ql disk.

See the REMark's for information - like 5.1, this is of little use to
the non-technical.
